Jorgenson, Dale W. (2002), Econometrics, Volume 3: Economic Growth in the Information Age, MIT Press.

Preface

Stagflation of the 1970s, unanticipated American revival of the 1990s, combination of more rapid growth and lower inflation.

``[T]he remarkable behavior of information technology (IT) prices is the key to understanding the growth resurgence of the American economy.  This can be traced to developments in semiconductor technology.'' (p. xvii)

Translation: Look at the evolution of the productive forces of labor, labor in these specific branches: the production of semiconductors and the production of inputs to semiconductor production.  How can I empirically do this?  US BEA data.  Also, look at price indices compared to the overall price index.

``Productivity growth in IT-producing industries has gradually risen in importance and a productivity revival is now underway in the rest of the economy. [.... A] consensus is building that the remarkable behavior of IT prices provides the key to the surge in economic growth.''

``[...] the foundation for the American growth resurgence is the development and deployment of semiconductors.  The decline in IT prices is rooted in developments in semiconductor technology [...] This technology has found its broadest applications in computing and communications equipment, but has reduced the cost of a wide variety of other products.'' 

Downstream improvements in productivity originated at the semiconductors branch.  This is the perspective from 2002, over 10 years ago.

``A substantial acceleration in the IT price decline occurred in 1995, triggered by a much sharper acceleration in the price decline of semiconductors in 1994.  Although the decline in semiconductor prices has been projected to continue for at least another decade, the recent acceleration could be temporary.  This can be traced to a shift in the product cycle for semiconductors from three years to two years that took place in 1995 as the consequence of intensifying competition in markets for semiconductor products.''



