At a more concrete level than Marx was able to elaborate in his life's work, the modification of the laws of motion of pure capitalism by the state needs to be incorporated.  Preobrazhensky and Lebowitz have sketched this for us.  I want to improve on them by doing the mathematical modeling of this ``dual'' regulatory mechanisms.  Rubin's history of thought, p. 26, on how during the early formation of capitalism these two forces intertwin.

Also triggered by Rubin's thoughts (p. 29) on how the shifts in the industrial and trade structure (England from exporting wool to exporting cloth) led to changes in the political and ideological balance of forces between early and late mercantilism.  Think of China today.  How has its industrial and trade structure empowered and weakened different segments of society in and out of the political establishment?

Petty on the method, using math and stats.  Rubin (p. 69).  Compare to Marx's on the precision of the natural sciences in preface to 1859 contribution.

[Also, perhaps Rubin is wrong and Petty is right in his view of land rent driving interest in those bygone times.  Rubin seems to think that interest is something that happens within the interest-bearing capital markets alone, rather than a general equilibrium thing.  However, interest rate has a material content, namely the marginal cost and benefit of transferring wealth from $t$ to $t+1$.  That is much more general and pervasive across all kinds of capital forms.  At Petty's time, farming was dominant, and land rent was the main form that intertemporal wealth transfer took.  So, the joke is on Rubin.  He is taking Marx's volume 3 discourse on interest-beraring capital, corresponding to an advanced pure capitalist economy dominated by industry, and retrojecting it into Petty's early capitalism.  Also (p. 71-72), land price and interest are determined at once. Simultaneity.]

[Similar with regards to the difficulties alluded by Rubin to go from empirical observation and inference to theoretical generalization.  Maybe Marxists have been too shy, to distracted by the rough edges (errors) in statistics.  Quick and dirty works, with the error in mind.]

[Rubin criticizes Petty for conflating value and use value, but maybe the problem is that Rubin sees the difference but not the identity between value and use value.  How can anybody quantify or count any product without implying the relative social importance assigned to each of its constitutent parts?  Aren't all products constituted by different parts?  There's no perfectly homogenous or uniform product, because not even one Hydrogen atom is identical to another H atom next to it.  Petty was into growth accounting (p. 73-74), and Rubin missed that.]





