The main issue is that Rubin and the Marxists of his time (and Marxists until now, it seems) have a notion of use value as an abstract absolute.  In other words, they do not seem to note that once you define use value qualitatively (as category that captures an aspect of a commodity), then use value is thereby delimited quantitatively.  Thus, an object does not have use value in general, in the abstract sense of being able to meet some undefined human needs.  Because there are no undefined, undetermined, abstract human needs (except in our imagination), but only human needs in particular social, historical contexts.  In needs in history are quantitatively limited.  There are only so many mouths to feed, so many machines to productively consume some raw material, etc.  

The quantitative determination of value is tightly intertwined with the quantitative aspect of use value.  The Marxists so far have noticed the difference and opposition between use value and value, but they have not perceived their identity.

[Rubin quotes from Marx, \emph{Theories of Surplus Value}, Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1956.]

``To interpret Marx's views, it is necessary to start with the fourth chapter of Volume I of Theories of Surplus Value, which has
the title, `Theories of Productive and Unproductive Labor.' (p. 259)

Actually, no.  The starting point on this should be Marx's mature views, in chapter 12 of \emph{Capital}.

``Marx gives a brief formulation of the ideas developed in this chapter in Volume I of \emph{Capital}, in Chapter 16: `Capitalist production is not merely the production of commodities, it is essentially the production of surplus-value. The laborer produces, not for himself, but for capital. It no longer suffices, therefore, that he should simply produce. He must produce surplus-value. That laborer alone is productive, who produces surplus-value for the capitalist, and thus works for the self-expansion of capital.'' (p. 259)

This is fine so far.  But then Rubin (as many others) get distracted with the question of the `materiality' or lack thereof of the product.  That confusion leads them astray.  Marx himself was not clear on this.

`` [Rubin continues quoting Marx:] `Hence the notion of a productive laborer implies not merely a relation between work and useful effect, between laborer and product of labor, but also a specific, social relation of production, a relation that has sprung up historically and stamps the laborer as the direct means of creating surplus-value' (C., I, p. 509).''

This is fine.  There are no ``useful-in-general'' products, but only ``useful-in-specific-social-context'' products.  Yet, Rubin does not push this logic to the its consequences.

``Marx promises to consider this question in detail in `volume four' of Capital, namely in \emph{Theories of Surplus Value}. Actually, at the end of the first volume of \emph{Theories of Surplus Value}, we find a digression which, in essence, represents a detailed development of ideas which were already formulated in the first volume of \emph{Capital}.'' (p. 259)

It seems to me that Marx wrote what appeared in volume I of \emph{Capital} after he wrote the manuscripts published as \emph{Theories of Surplus Value}.  So, it is better to take \emph{Capital} as Marx's latest word on the subject.

``First of all, Marx notes that `Only bourgeois narrow-mindedness, which regards the capitalist forms of production as absolute forms -- hence as eternal, natural forms of production -- can confuse the question of what is productive labor from the standpoint of capital with the question of what labor is productive in general, or what is productive labor in general.' Marx throws out as useless the question of what kind of labor is productive in general, in all historical epochs, independently of tire given social relations. Every system of production relations, every economic order, has its concept of productive labor. Marx confined his analysis to the question of which labor is productive from the standpoint of capital, or in the capitalist system of economy.'' (p. 260)

This is right at a high level of abstraction.  However, in embryo, the general human viewpoint also exists in a capitalist society though embodied in the workers as they concretely and historically exist.  There's a contradiction here, since workers have a perspective both as wage workers, confined within capitalist society, and aspirationally as free producers.  The latter develops along with the workers' political development, unity, fighting disposition, etc.  So this question is useless only if it is taken in the abstract, rather than in a concrete historical manner, considering the development of the workers.

``[Rubin continues to quote Marx:] `Only labor which is directly transformed into capital is productive; that is, only labor which makes variable capital a variable magnitude' (Ibid., p. 381). In other words, productive labor is `labor which is directly exchanged with capital' (Ibid., p. 153), i.e., labor which the capitalist buys as his variable capital for the purpose of using that labor to create exchange values and to create surplus value. Unproductive labor is that labor `which is not exchanged with capital, but directly with revenue, that is, with wages or profit (including of course the various categories of those who share as co-partners in the capitalist's profit, such as interest and rent)' (Ibid., p. 153).'' (p. 260)

Labor exchanged with revenue (e.g. wages) is the case of a servant hired by a wage worker to assist her in domestic chores or (e.g. profit, interest, rent) a servant hired by a capitalist to help cleaning house, etc.  Actually, as Marx himself suggests, there is a sense in which the reproduction of the worker (e.g. the activities that produce labor power in the worker's household) is an indirect aspect (but integral) of the reproduction of social capital.  Something similar can be said about the reproduction of the capitalists through their personal consumption.  This is going to sound Hegelian, but capital needs the capitalists to exist.

``Two conclusions necessarily follow from Marx's definitions: 1) every labor which a capitalist buys with his variable capital in order to draw from it a surplus value, is productive labor, independently of whether or not this labor is objectified in material objects, and whether or not this labor is objectively necessary or useful for the process of social production (for example, the labor of a clown employed by a circus manager).'' (p. 260)

This is a distraction.  It derails the analysis and focuses it on the alleged lack of materiality of circus entertainment.  

The product has to be a use value (in quality and quantity).  That is a premise for the product to be a commodity.  If the product is not useful in the context of a capitalist society, useful as a consumption commodity or means of production, then it cannot be a commodity, have value, and therefore surplus value.  The production of "entertainment flows" by a clown is material production.  "Entertainment" is here a material good, it exists in material media (electromagnetic waves, acoustic waves, the eyes, ears, brains, bodies of the audience, etc.).

``2) Every labor which the capitalist does not buy with his variable capital is not productive from the point of view of the capitalist economy, even though this labor might be objectively useful and might be objectified in material consumer goods which satisfy human subsistence needs. At first glance, these two conclusions are paradoxical and contradictory to the conventional understanding of productive labor. However, they follow logically from Marx's definition. And Marx applies it boldly. `An actor, for example, or even a clown, according to this definition, is a productive laborer if he works in the service of a capitalist (an entre preneur) to whom he returns more labor than he receives from him in the form of wages; while a jobbing tailor who comes to the capitalist's house and patches his trousers for him, producing a mere use-value for him, is an unproductive laborer. The former's labor is exchanged with capital, the latter's with revenue. The former's labor produces a surplus-value; in the latter's, revenue is consumed' (Ibid., p. 153).'' (p. 261)

Rubin is now focusing on the wrong issue.

``At first glance this example is strikingly paradoxical. The useless labor of the clown is considered productive labor, and the highly useful labor of die tailor is treated as unproductive.'' (p. 261) 

Useless?  But usefulness or uselessness in general are ``useless'' notions.

``What is the meaning of these definitions given by Marx?  In the majority of textbooks on political economy, productive labor is treated from the standpoint of its objective necessity for social production in general, or for the production of material goods. In these treatments, the decisive factor is the content of the labor, namely its result, which is usually a material object to which the labor is directed and which is created by the labor. Marx's problem has nothing in common with this problem except the title. For Marx productive labor means: labor which is engaged in the given social system of production. Marx is interested in the question of what social production is, how the working activity of people who are engaged in the system of social production differs from the working activity of people who are not engaged in social production (for example, labor which is directed to the satisfaction of personal needs or to the service of a household). By what criterion is the working activity of people included in social production, what makes it `productive' labor?'' (p. 261)

Marx cannot be indifferent to the issue of whether labor is devoted to an activity that produces a material good, i.e. activities other than enacting, administering, enforcing, or adjudicating social hierarchies and the ``change of forms'' in commodity exchange.  The usefulness of the product is a premise for the product to have value and, therefore, surplus value.

``Marx gave the following answer to this question. Every system of production is distinguished by the totality of production relations which are determined by the social form of organization of labor. In the capitalist society, labor is organized in the form of wage labor, i.e., the economy is organized in the form of capitalist enterprises [uh, the organization of capital, i.e. going from individual capitals to collective forms of capital such as an ``enterprise'' is a layer of concretion above], where wage laborers work under the command of a capitalist. They create commodities and yield a surplus value for the capitalist. Only the labor which is organized in the form of capitalist enterprises [no, labor that is hired and employed by the capitalists and that produces surplus value, here ``capitalist enterprises'' are not required], which has the form of wage labor, hired by capital for the purpose of drawing out of it a surplus value, is included in the system of capitalist production. Such labor is `productive' labor. Every type of labor which is included in the given system of social production can be considered productive, i.e., every type of labor organized in the determined social form characteristic of the given system of production. In other words, labor is considered productive or unproductive not from the standpoint of its content, namely in terms of the character of the concrete working activity, but from the standpoint of the social form of its organization, of its consistency with the production relations which characterize the given economic order of the society. Marx frequently noted this characteristic. This sharply distinguishes his theory from conventional theories of productive labor which assign a decisive role to the content of working activity. (p. 262)

``[Rubin quotes:] `These definitions [of productive labor—I.R.] are therefore not [not only, JH] derived from the material characteristics of labor (neither from the nature of its product nor from the particular character of the labor as concrete labor) but from the definite social form, the social relations of production, within which the labor is realized' (Ibid., p. 153). `It is a definition of labor which is derived not from its content or its result, but from its particular social form' (Ibid., p. 154). `The determinate material form of the labor, and therefore, of its product, in itself has nothing to do with this distinction between productive and unproductive labor' (Ibid.). `... the content, the concrete character, the particular utility of the labor, seems at first to make no difference' (Ibid., p. 392). `... this distinction between productive and unproductive labor has nothing to do either with the particular specialty of the labor or with the particular use-value in which this special labor is incorporated' (Ibid., p. 156). [Note the adjective ``particular.'' But some use value must be.] (p. 262)

``From all this it follows that, from a material standpoint, one and the same labor is productive or unproductive (i.e., is included or not included in the capitalist system of production) depending on whether or not it is organized in the form of a capitalistic enterprise.

``[Rubin quotes:] `For example, the workman employed by a piano maker is a productive laborer. His labor not only replaces the wages that he consumes, but in the product, the piano, the commodity which the piano maker sells, there is a surplus-value over and above the value of the wages. But assume on the contrary that I buy all the materials required for a piano (or for all it matters the laborer himself may possess them), and that instead of buying the piano in a shop I have it made for me in my house. The workman who makes the piano is now an unproductive laborer, because his labor is exchanged directly against my revenue' (Ibid., p. 156). In the first case, the worker who produces the piano is included in a capitalist enterprise and thus in a system of capitalist production. In the second case he is not. `For example Milton, who wrote Paradise Lost for five pounds, was an unproductive laborer [here Marxists think that this labor is ``unproductive'' because the product is a book, but the reason is that he produced the book for his own pleasure and that of the readers, not for the money, his selling the book was accidental, or as a ``freelancer'' wanting to make a simple living by selling his products, and there is no surplus value production involved in it]. On the other hand, the writer who turns out stuff for Iris publisher in factory style, is a productive laborer. Milton produced Paradise Lost for the same reason that a silk worm produces silk. It was an activity of his nature. Later he sold the product for 5 pounds. But the literary proletarian of Leipzig, who fabricates books (for example, Compendia of Economics) under the direction of his publisher, is a productive laborer; for his product is from the outset subsumed under capital, and comes into being only for the purpose of increasing that capital. A singer who sells her song for her own account is an unproductive laborer [producer of value at most, but not of surplus value]. But the same singer commissioned by an entrepreneur to sing in order to make money for him is a productive laborer; for she produces capital' (Ibid., p. 389).'' (p. 263)

``The capitalist form of organization of labor includes labor in the system of capitalist production and makes it "productive" labor. All working activities which do not take place in the form of an enterprise organized on capitalist principles are not included in the capitalist system of production and are not considered `productive' labor. This is the character of working activities directed to the satisfaction of personal needs (remnants of natural household economy). Even wage labor, if it is not employed to yield surplus value (for example, the labor of household servants) is not productive in the sense defined above. But the labor of household servants is not unproductive because it is `useless' or because it does not produce material goods. As Marx said, the labor of a cook produces `material use-values' (Ibid., p. 155), but it is nevertheless unproductive if the cook is hired as a personal servant. On the other hand, the labor of a lackey, even though it does not produce material goods and is usually recognized as `useless,' may be productive labor if it is organized in the form of a capitalist enterprise. `... the cooks and waiters in a public hotel are productive laborers, in so far as their labor is transformed into capital for the proprietor of the hotel. The same persons are unproductive laborers as menial servants, inasmuch as I do not make capital out of their services, but spend revenue on them. In fact, however, these same persons are also for me, the consumer, unproductive laborers in the hotel' (Ibid., pp. 154-155). `Productive laborers may themselves in relation to me be unproductive laborers. For example, if I have my house re-papered and the paper-hangers are wage workers of a master who sells me the job, it is just the same for me as if I had bought a house already papered; as if I had expended money for a commodity for my consumption. But for the master who gets these laborers to hang the paper, they are productive laborers, for they produce surplus value for him" (Ibid., p. 393). (p. 263)

``Must we understand Marx to mean that he recognizes only a subjective and relative criterion, but not a social and objective criterion of productiveness of labor? We think not. [Here, clearly, Rubin is struggling with Marx and his own limited view of the subject.  The word ``subjective'' carries a negative connotation he needs to push away.] Marx only states that the labor of an upholsterer, if it is part of the household of the consumer-customer, is not yet included in the system of capitalist production. It becomes productive only when it becomes included in the economy of a capitalist entrepreneur. (p. 264)

``Consequently only that labor which is organized on capitalist principles and thus is included in the system of capitalist production is productive labor. Capitalist production must not be understood as the existing, concrete social-economic system, which is not composed exclusively of enterprises of a capitalist character; it also contains remnants of pre-capitalist forms of production (for example, peasant and craft production). The system of capitalist production encompasses only the economic units which are formed on capitalist principles. It is a scientific abstraction derived from concrete economic reality, and in this abstract form it represents the subject of political economy as the science of the capitalist economy. In the capitalist economy, as a theoretical abstraction, the labor of the peasant and the craftsman does not exist. The question of their productiveness is not treated: `they [craftsmen and peasants-I.R.] confront me as sellers of commodities, not as sellers of labor, and this relation therefore has nothing to do with the exchange of capital for labor; therefore also it has nothing to do with the distinction between productive and unproductive labor, which depends entirely on whether the labor is exchanged for money as money or for money as capital. They therefore belong neither to the category of productive or of unproductive laborers, although they are producers of commodities. But their production does not fall under the capitalist mode of production' (Ibid., pp. 394-395).

``From the standpoint of Marx's definition of productive labor,
the labor of the civil servant, of the police, of soldiers and priests,
cannot be related to productive labor. Not because this labor is
"useless" or because it is not materialized in "things," but only
because it is organized on principles of public law, and not in the
form of private capitalist enterprises. A postal employee is not a
productive worker, but if the post were organized in the form of a
private capitalist enterprise which charges money for the delivery of
letters and parcels, wage laborers in these enterprises would be productive
laborers. If the job of protecting freight and passengers on
roads were not carried out by the state police but rather by private
transportation bureaus which maintained armed protection by hired
workers, the members of such bureaus would be productive laborers.
Their labor would be included in the system of capitalist production,
and these private bureaus would be subject to the laws of capitalist
production (for example, to the law of equal rates of profit for all
branches of production). This cannot be said of the post or the
police, which are organized on principles of public law. The labor of
postal or police civil servants is not included in the system of
capitalist production; it is not productive labor.

(p. 265)

As we can see, when Marx defined productive labor, he completely
abstracted from its content, from the concrete, useful
character and result of the labor. He treated labor only from the
standpoint of its social form. Labor which is organized in a capitalist
enterprise is productive labor. The concept "productive," as well as
the other concepts of Marx's political economy, have a historical and
social character. This is why it would be extremely incorrect to
ascribe a "materialistic" character to Marx's theory of productive
labor. From Marx's point of view, one cannot consider only labor
which serves the satisfaction of material needs (and not so-called
spiritual needs) as productive labor. On the very first page of Capital,
Marx wrote: "Tire nature of such wants, whether, for instance, they
spring from the stomach or from fancy, makes no difference" (C„ I,
p. 35). The nature of the wants plays no role. In the same way, Marx
did not attach any decisive significance to the difference between
physical and intellectual labor. Marx spoke of this in a well-known
passage in Chapter 14 of the first volume of Capital, and in numerous
other places. With reference to the labor of the "overlooker, engineer,
manager, clerk, etc.—in a word, the labor of the whole personnel
required in a particular sphere of material production," he stated
that, "In fact they add their aggregate labor to the constant capital,
and increase the value of the product by this amount. (How far is
this true of bankers, etc?)" (Theories of Surplus Value, Part I, p.
160).2 Intellectual laborers are supposed to be "indispensable" for the
process of production, and thus they "earn" rewards from products
created by physical workers. According to Marx, however, they create
new value. From this value they receive a reward, leaving a part of
this value in the hands of the capitalist in the form of unpaid value,
surplus value.

Intellectual labor necessary for the process of material production
in no way differs from physical labor. It is "productive" if it is
organized on capitalist principles. In this case it is completely the
same thing whether the intellectual labor is organized together with
the physical labor in one enterprise (engineering bureau, chemical
laboratory or an accounting bureau in a factory), or separated into an
independent enterprise (an independent experimental chemical laboratory
which has the task of improving production, and so on).
The following difference between types of labor has major significance
for the problem of productive labor: this is a difference
between labor which "embodies itself in material use-values" (Ibid.,

2 The reservation about bankers will become clearer below.

p. 266

p. 162) and labor or service "which assume no objective form
—wiiich do not receive an existence as things separate from those
performing the services" (Ibid.), namely, where "production cannot
be separated from the act of producing, as is the case with all performing
artists, orators, actors, teachers, physicians, priests, etc."
(Ibid., p. 398).3 Assuming that "the entire world of commodities, all
spheres of material production—the production of material wealthare
(formally or really) subordinated to the capitalist mode of production"
(Ibid., p. 397), the sphere of material production as a whole
is included in the sphere of productive, namely capitalistically organized
labor. On the other hand, phenomena related to non-material
production "are so insignificant compared with the totality of production
that they can be left entirely out of account" (Ibid., p. 398).
Thus, on the basis of two assumptions, namely, 1) that material
production as a whole is organized on capitalist principles, and 2)
that non-material production is excluded from our analysis, productive
labor can be defined as labor which produces material wealth.
"And so productive labor, along with its determining characteristic—
which takes no account whatever of the content of labor and is
entirely independent of that content—would be given a second, different
and subsidiary definition" (Ibid., p. 397). It is necessary to
remember that this is a "secondary" definition which is valid only if
the above-listed premises are given, i.e., if capitalistically organized
labor is assumed in advance. Actually, as Marx himself frequently
pointed out, productive labor in the sense defined above, and labor
which produces material wealth, do not coincide; they diverge in two
ways. Productive labor encompasses labor which is not embodied in
material things if it is organized on capitalist principles. On the other
hand, labor which produces material wealth but which is not organized
in the form of capitalist production is not productive labor from
the standpoint of capitalist production (see Theories of Surplus
Value, p. 162).4 If we do not take the "secondary definition" but

3 Economists do not always carry through a clcar diiference between
labor which has a material character, labor which is designated to the satisfaction
of material needs, and labor which is embodied in material things. For
example, on two pages, S. Bulgakov, when he speaks of productive labor, has in
mind either "labor directed to making objects useful to man" or "labor
directed to the satisfaction of material needs," in "O nekotorykh osnovnykh
ponyatyakh politicheskoi ekonomii" (On Some Basic Concepts of Political
Economy), Nauchnoe Obozrenie (Scientific Survey), 1898, No. 2, pp. 335 and
336. 
4 See B. I. Gorev, Na ideologicheskom fronte (On the Ideological Front),
1923, pp. 24-26.

p. 267

the "decisive characteristic" of productive labor, which Marx defines
as labor which creates surplus value, then we see that all traces of
"materialistically" defined labor are eliminated from Marx's definition.
This definition takes as its starting-point the social (namely
capitalistic) form of organization of labor. This definition has a sociological
character.

At first glance, the conception of productive labor which Marx
developed in Theories of Surplus Value diverges from Marx's view of
the labor of workers and clerks employed in trade and credit (Capital,
Vol. II, Chapter 6, and Vol. Ill, Chapters 16-19). Marx does not
consider such labor productive. According to many social scientists,
including Marxists, Marx refused to consider this labor productive
because it does not bring about changes in material things. According
to them, this is a trace of "materialistic" theories of productive labor.
Noting the position of the "classical school, that productive labor, or
labor which creates value (from a bourgeois point of view, this is a
simple tautology), must certainly be embodied in material things," V.
Bazarov asked with astonishment: "How could Marx commit such a
mistake, after having discovered the fetishistic psychology of the
commodity producer with such ingenuity?"5 A. Bogdanov criticized
theories which separate "intellectual" and "material" aspects of labor,
and added: "These conceptions of classical political economy were
not subjected by Marx to the critique which they deserve: in general,
Marx himself supported these conceptions."6

Is it actually true that Volumes II and III are imbued with the
"materialistic" conception of productive labor which Marx subjected
to detailed and destructive criticism in Theories of Surplus Value?
Actually, such a glaring contradiction in Marx's views does not exist.
Marx does not renounce the concept of productive labor as labor
which is organized on capitalistic principles independently of its concrete
useful character and its results. But if this is so, why does Marx
not consider the labor of salesmen and store clerks, organized in a
capitalistic commercial enterprise, productive? To answer this question,
we must remember that wherever Marx spoke of productive
labor as labor which is hired by capital in Theories of Surplus Value,
he had in mind only productive capital. The addendum to the first
V. Bazarov, Trud proizvoditelnyt i trad, obrazuyushchii tsennost'
(Productive Labor and Labor which Creates Value), Petersburg: 1899, p. 23.

6 A. Bogdanov and I. Stepanov, Kurs politicheskoi ekonomii (Course of
Political Economy), Vol. II, 4 t h Edition, p. 12.

p. 268

volume of Theories of Surplus Valued which has the title "The Concept
of Productive Labor," begins with the question of productive
capital. From here, Marx moves on to productive labor. This addendum
ends with the words: "Here we have been dealing only with
productive capital, that is, capital employed in the direct process of
production. We come later to capital in the process of circulation.
And only after that, in considering the special form assumed by
capital as merchant's capital, can the question be answered as to how
far the laborers employed by it are productive or unproductive."®
Thus the question of productive labor rests on the question of productive
capital, i.e., on the well-known theory, in Volume II of
Capital, of the "Metamorphoses of Capital." According to this
theory, capital goes through three phases in its process of reproduction:
money capital, productive capital and commodity capital. The
first and diird phases represent the "process of circulation of capital,"
and the second phase, die "process of production of capital."
"Productive" capital, in this schema, is not opposed to unproductive
capital, but to capital in the "process of circulation." Productive
capital directly organizes the process of the creation of consumer
goods in the wider sense. This process includes all work which is
necessary for the adaptation of goods for the purpose of consumption,
for example, preservation, transport, packaging, and so on.
Capital in the process of circulation organizes "genuine circulation,"
purchase and sale, for example the transfer of the right of ownership
abstracted from the actual transfer of products. This capital overcomes
the friction of the commodity capitalist system, so to speak,
friction which is due to the fact that the system is splintered into
individual economic units. It precedes and follows tiie process of
creating consumer goods, though it is linked to this process indirectly.
The "production of capital" and the "circulation of capital"
become independent in Marx's system, and they are treated separately,
even though at the same time Marx does not lose sight of the
unity of the entire process of reproduction of capital. This is the
basis for the distinction between labor employed in production and
labor employed in circulation. However, this division has nothing to
do with a division of labor into labor which produces changes in

7 [Cf. K. Kautsky's edition of Marx's Theories of Surplus Value, New
York: International Publishers, 1952.]
8 [Marx, Theories of Surplus Value, Part I, Moscow: FLPH, 1956. p.
400.]

p. 269

material goods and labor which does not possess this property, Marx
distinguishes labor hired by "productive" capital, or more precisely
by capital in the phase of production, from labor which is hired by
commodity or money capital, or more precisely capital in the phase
of circulation. Only the first type of labor is "productive," not
because it produces material goods, but because it is hired by "productive"
capital, i.e., capital in the phase of production. The participation
of labor in the production of consumer goods (not necessarily
material goods) represents, for Marx, an additional property of
tire productive character of labor, but not its criterion. The criterion
remains the capitalist form of organization of labor. The productive
character of labor is an expression of the productive character of
capital. The movement of the phases of capital determines the characteristics
of the labor which they hire. Here Marx remains true to his
view that in the capitalist society the moving force of development is
capital: its movements determine the movement of labor, which is
subordinate to capital.

Thus, according to Marx, every type of labor organized in
forms of the capitalist process of production, or more precisely, labor
hired by "productive" capital, i.e., capital in the phase of production,
is productive labor. The labor of salesmen is not productive, not
because it does not produce changes in material goods, but only
because it is hired by capital in the phase of circulation. The labor of
the clown in the service of the circus entrepreneur is productive even
though it does not produce changes in material goods and, from the
standpoint of the requirements of the social economy, it is less useful
than the labor of salesmen. The labor of the clown is productive
because it is employed by capital in the phase of production. (The
result of tire production in this case consists of non-material goods,
jests, but this does not change the problem. The clown's jests have
use-value and exchange-value. Their exchange-value is greater than the
value of the reproduction of the clown's labor power, i.e., than his
wage and the expenditures for constant capital. Consequently, the
entrepreneur draws a surplus value.) On the other hand, the labor of
a cashier in a circus, who sells tickets for the clown's performances, is
unproductive, because he is hired by capital in the phase of circulation:
he only assists in transferring the "right to watch the show,"
the right to enjoy the jests of the clown, from one person (the
entrepreneur) to another (the public).9

9 What has been said does not mean that Marx did not see any difference
between material and non-material production. Recognizing as productive every
p. 270

For an accurate grasp of Marx's idea, it is necessary to grasp
clearly that the phase of circulation of capital does not mean an
"actual," "real" circulation and distribution of products, i.e., a process
of real transfer from the hands of producers to the hands of
consumers, which is necessarily accompanied by the processes of
transport, preservation, packaging and so on. The function of circulation
of capital is only to transfer the right of ownership of a product
from one person to another, only a transformation of value from a
commodity form to a money form, or inversely, only a realization of
produced value. It is an ideal or formal transition, but not a real one.
These are "costs of circulation, which originate in a mere change of
form of value, in circulation, ideally considered" (C., II, p. 139). "We
are concerned here only with the general character of the costs of
circulation, which arise out of the metamorphosis of forms alone"
(Ibid., p. 138). Marx established the following proposition: "The
general law is that all costs of circulation which arise only from
changes in the forms of commodities do not add to their value"
(Ibid., p. 152).

Marx sharply distinguished this "formal metamorphosis," which
is the essence of the phase of circulation, from the "real function" of
commodity capital (C., III, p. 268). Among these real functions Marx
included: transport, storage, "distribution of commodities in a distributable
form" (Ibid., p. 267), "expressing, transporting, distributing,
retailing" (Ibid., p. 282 and p. 288). It is to be understood that
the formal realization of value, i.e., the transfer of the right of
ownership over products, "acts as middleman in their realization and
thereby simultaneously in the actual exchange of commodities, i.e., in
their transfer from hand to hand, in the social metabolism" (Ibid., p.
282). But theoretically, the formal realization, the genuine function
of capital in circulation, is completely different from the real functions
mentioned above, which are in essence foreign to this capital
and have a "heterogeneous" character (Ibid., p. 282). In usual commercial
enterprises these formal and real functions usually intermingle
and intertwine. The labor of a salesman in a store serves for the real
function of preservation, unpacking, packing, transport, and so on,
and the formal functions of purchase and sale. But these functions
labor employed by productive capital, Marx apparently held that inside of this
productive labor it was necessary to distinguish "productive labor in a narrow
sense," namely, labor employed in material production and embodied in
material things (Theorien Uber den Melmvert, 111, p. 496).

p. 271

can be separated in terms of persons as well as territorially: "purchasable
and saleable commodities may be stored in docks or in other
public premises" (Ibid., p. 289j, for example, in commercial and
transportation warehouses. The formal moment of realization, purchase
and sale, may take place elsewhere, in a special "sales bureau."
The formal and the real aspects of circulation are separate from each
other.

Marx viewed all the real functions as "production processes
continuing within the process of circulation" (Ibid., pp. 267-268),
"processes of production which may continue in the process of circulation"
(Ibid., p. 288). They are "processes of production which
are only continued in circulation, the productive character of which
is hence merely concealed by the circulation form" (C., II, p. 139).
Thus labor which is applied in these "processes of production" is
productive labor which creates value and surplus value. If the labor of
salesmen consists of carrying out real functions: preservation, transport,
packaging, etc., it is productive labor, not because it is embodied
in material goods (preservation does not produce such
changes) but because it is engaged in the "process of production,"
and is consequently hired by productive capital. The labor of the
same commercial clerk is unproductive only if it serves exclusively
the "formal metamorphosis" of value, its realization, the ideal
transfer of tire right of ownership over the product from one person
to another. The "formal metamorphosis" which takes place in the
"sales bureau" and which is separate from all real functions, also
requires certain circulation costs and expenditures of labor, namely
for accounting, bookkeeping, correspondence, etc. (C., Ill, p. 289.)
This labor is not productive, but once again not because it does not
create material goods, but because it serves the "formal metamorphosis"
of value, the phase of "circulation" of capital in pure
form.

Accepting Marx's distinction between "formal" and "material"
functions (we prefer the term "real," which is found in Marx's work;
the term "material" may lead to misunderstanding), V. Bazarov
denies that tire formal functions can require "the application of a
single atom of living human labor."1 0 "In reality only the 'material'
aspect of the functions of commodity capital absorb living human
labor. However, the formal metamorphosis does not require any
'expenditures' from tire merchant." We cannot agree with Bazarov's

10 Bazarov, Op. Cit., p. 35.

p. 272

view. Let us assume that all real, "material" functions are separate
from the formal functions, and that goods are preserved in special
warehouses, docks, etc. Let us assume that in the "sales bureau" only
the formal act of purchase and sale takes place, the transfer of the
right of ownership over the commodity. The expenditures for the
equipment in the bureau, tire maintenance of the clerks, sales agents,
the keeping of accounts, to the extent that these are caused by the
transfer of the right of ownership from one person to another, are all
"genuine costs of circulation" related only to the formal metamorphosis
of value. As we can see, even the formal metamorphosis of
value requires "expenditures" by the merchant and the application of
human labor which, in this case, is unproductive according to Marx.
We turn the attention of the reader to the question of bookkeeping
because, as some writers claim, Marx denied the productive
character of labor in bookkeeping in all cases.11 We hold such a view
to be erroneous. Actually, Marx's views on "bookkeeping" (C., II,
Chapter 6) are distinguished by extreme obscurity and may be interpreted
in the above sense. But from the standpoint of Marx's
conception of productive labor, the question of the labor of bookkeepers
does not raise particular doubts. If bookkeeping is necessary
for the performance of real functions of production, even if these
functions are carried out in the course of circulation (the labor of the
bookkeeper is related to production, preservation, transport of
goods), then bookkeeping is related to the process of production. The
labor of the bookkeeper is unproductive only when he performs the
formal metamorphosis of value—the transfer of the right of ownership
over the product, the act of purchase and sale in its ideal form. We
again repeat that in this case the labor of the bookkeeper is not
unproductive because it does not produce changes in material goods
(in this respect it does not differ from the labor of a bookkeeper in
the factory), but because it is hired by capital in the phase of circulation
(separated from all real functions).

These distinctions between formal and real functions of commodity
capital, or between circulation in its pure form and "the
Such a view can be found in the work of V. Bazarov (Op. Cit., p. 49)
and I. Davydov, in his article "K voprosu o proizvoditel'nom i neproizvoditel'nom
trude" (Contribution to the Problem of Productive and Unproductive
Labor), Nauchnoe Obozrenie (Scientific Survey), 1900, No. 1, p.
154; and C. Prokopovich, "K kritike Marksa" (Contribution to the Critique of
Marx), 1901, p. 35; Julian Borchardt, Die volkswirtschaftlichen Grundbegriffe
nach der Lehre von Karl Marx. Berlin: Buchverlag Rätebund, 1920, p. 72.

p. 273

processes of production which are carried out in the process of circulation,"
are applied by Marx in Volumes II and III of Capital. We
cannot agree with the view that Marx applied these distinctions only
in Volume III, while Volume II arbitrarily treats all expenditures on
exchange, including those expended on the real functions of circulation,
as unproductive. V. Bazarov1 2 and A. Bogdanov 1 3 expressed
such a view of die major difference between the second and third
volumes of Capital. Actually, even in Volume II of Capital, Marx
relates only "genuine costs of circulation" and not all costs of circulation,
to unconditionally unproductive costs (C, II, p. 132). In
Volume II he speaks of "processes of production" which are carried
out in exchange and have a productive character (Ibid., p. 139).
Without taking into consideration minor differences in shades of
thought and formulation, we do not find a basic contradiction
between Volumes II and III of Capital. This is not to deny that in
Chapter 17 of Volume III, and particularly in Chapter 6 of Volume
II, discordant passages, terminological unclarity and individual contradictions
are found, but the basic conception of productive labor as
labor which is hired by capital (even in supplementary processes of
production which are carried out in circulation) and unproductive
labor which serves capital in the phase of pure circulation or in the
"formal metamorphosis" of value, is very clear.

A. Bogdanov objects to Marx's division of the functions of
commodity capital into real (continuation of the productive process)
and formal (pure circulation) on the ground that in capitalism the
formal functions are just as "objectively necessary" as the real, since
their purpose is to satisfy real requirements of the given productive
system.1'* However, Marx did not intend to deny the necessity of the
phase of circulation in the process of reproduction of capital. "He
[the buying and selling agent] performs a necessary function, because
the process of reproduction itself includes unproductive functions"
(C., II, p. 134) i.e., the function of pure circulation. "The labor-time
required in these operations [of pure circulation] is devoted to
certain necessary operations of the reproduction process of capital,
but yields no additional value" (C., Ill, p. 290). According to Marx,
the phases of production and circulation are equally necessary in the

12 Op. Cit.. pp. 39-40.
13 Kurs politicheskoi ekonomii (Course of Political Economy),. Vol. II,
Part 4, pp. 12-13.
14 Op. Cit.. p. 13.

p. 274

process of reproduction of capital. But this does not abolish the
distinctive properties of these two phases of the movement of capital.
Labor hired by capital in the phase of production and labor hired by
capital in the phase of circulation are both necessary, but Marx
considered only the first productive. A. Bogdanov takes the objective
necessity of the labor for the given economic system as a criterion of
productiveness. In this way he not only erases the difference between
labor engaged in production and labor engaged in circulation, but he
conditionally adds "functions which are related to military
activity"1 5 to productive functions, even though functions related to
military activity are organized on the basis of public law and not on
the basis of private capitalist production. As opposed to Marx, A.
Bogdanov does not take the social form of organization of labor as
the criterion of its productiveness, but rather the "indispensability"
of tire labor, in its concrete and useful form, for the given economic
system.

Thus the conceptions of writers who reduce Marx's theory of
productive labor to a difference between labor embodied in material
things and labor which does not possess this property, must be
recognized as unconditionally erroneous. Hilferding gets closer to this
problem in Marx's work. He considers every labor "necessary for the
social purpose of production, and thus independent of the determined
historical form which the production takes in the given
determined social form," to be productive. "On the other hand, labor
which is expended only for the purposes of capitalist circulation, i.e.,
which originates from the determined historical organization of
production, does not create value."1 6 Some passages in Marx's work
(C., II, p. 138 and p. 142) are similar to Hilferding's definition of
unproductive labor. However, Hilferding's definition of productive
labor as "independent from the determined social form of production"
diverges from Marx's definition. Hilferding's conception that
the "criterion of productiveness... is one and the same in all social
formations" (Ibid.,) sharply contradicts Marx's entire system. Marx's
distinction between labor hired by capital in the phase of production
and labor hired by capital in the phase of circulation was reflected

15 Op. Cit., p. 17.
16 R. Hilferding, "Postanovka problemy teoreticheskoi ekonomii u
Marlcsa" (Marx's Formulation of the Problems of Theoretical Economics),
Osnovnye problemy politicheskoi ekonomii (Basic Problems of Political
Economy), 1922, pp. 107-108.

p. 275

and partly modified in Hilferding's conception.

We do not ask whether or not Marx's definition of productive
labor, based on the analysis of the social form of the labor, is correct,
or whether the conventional definitions in treatises on political
economy, which are based on "indispensability," "usefulness," the
"material" character of labor or its role in personal and productive
consumption, are correct. We do not say that Marx's distinction,
which abstracts from the content of the labor expenditures, is more
accurate than the more conventional views. We only hold that Marx's
view is different from these conventional views and is not covered by
them. Marx's attention was turned to another aspect of phenomena,
and we may in fact regret that Marx chose the term `productive' for
his treatment of the differences between labor hired by capital in the
phase of production and labor hired by capital in the phase of circulation.
The term `productive' had a different meaning in economic
science. (Perhaps a more suitable term would have been `production
labor.')
