Human activity in a global capitalist society can be quantified on, at least, three intertwined conceptual levels: (1) the activity itself measured over time, i.e. as labor time, (2) the material product of such activity, i.e. as the use values produced, and (3) the relative social importance of such product as it appears on the surface of social life, i.e. as the sum of values produced.

At first sight, it may seem as if measuring human activity over time is a straightforward task. Let us examine it.  Ultimately, what distinguishes human activity from other processes in nature, is that it is conscious and purposeful.  To the extent humans behave humanly, their activity is not spontaneous or aimless, but intentional.  As humans, individuals undertake actions with a certain design or vision of their product.  Measuring the length of time individuals in a given social setting conduct their intentional activity is plagued with conceptual difficulties.

Consider the ``simple'' activity of a carpenter making a plain wooden table with regular hand tools. The carpenter must begin by planning the work, perhaps by drawing a sketch of the finished table with pencil on paper.  Then she must collect all the tools and materials, and set up a proper space for his work.  She must then cut the wood pieces to size and shape, and then assemble them together with glue, nails, etc.  She must finally polish and varnish his table.  Clearly, there is an entire division of labor imposed by the nature of the intended product, with a series of tasks of distinct type.  To speak of table making is, in fact, to speak of table design, provision of tools and materials, workshop set up, wood cutting, assembling, and finishing, i.e. a host of specific tasks.  If analyzed, each of these tasks may in fact be viewed as a series of smaller and rather unique steps or relatively discrete efforts.  When measuring the length of time the individual carpenter requires to make the table as a whole, should one equate an hour of wood cutting to one hour of polishing or to one hour of varnishing?  One day the same carpenter may feel more inspired to cut wood than to varnish it, and hence may require less time cutting wood than varnishing.

Now consider manual table making as a branch of social production considered as a totality.  There will be a number of carpenters making wooden tables with different levels of competency in each of the individual tasks required, and also on table making regarded as a whole.  The aggregation or sum of the lengths of time used up by each carpenter in the making of the tables presupposes the equalizing of the activities of individuals that are in fact unique (e.g. one hour of Mary's table making = one hour of Peter's table making), or their reduction to some common norm (e.g., since Mary is a more experienced carpenter, then one hour of Mary's table making = 2 hours of Peter's table making).  This equalization or ``reduction'' is carried out by a concrete society, through a concrete social process (e.g. production of tables as commodities and their sale and purchase in concrete markets by concrete carpenters facing concrete technical (e.g. state of knowledge on table making) and economic (e.g. cost of wood, nails, etc.) constraints  individuals with a greater or smaller interest in acquiring and using such tables) under concrete historical conditions (e.g. in markets subject to particular degrees of regulation and taxation by the state, and under particular political circumstances that make it easier or harder for producers, consumers, and traders to exercise their legally codified ownership rights).

Let us consider the issue of how the ``reduction'' of one hour of an individual's labor time to that of another individual takes place.  For simplicity, suppose that all the tables are similar in quality to the point that the ultimate users or consumers are indifferent between one or the other.  Then saying that one hour of Mary's labor = 2 hours of Peter's labor is another way of saying that, as a rule, what Peter accomplishes in two hours in terms of tables, the material product of their labor, Mary can do in one hour alone.

If table making is conducted by two or more carpenters in cooperation, say if Mary cuts the wood, Peter assembles the pieces, and Paul polishes and varnishes the table, then the ``concrete'' labor that produces the table is much more ``abstract'' than it may appear at first sight.  The question of whether the time required to do wood cutting, assembling, and finishing should be regarded as time of the same or a distinct class arises.  Again, ...

* * *

First, the physical or materially objective level.  Humans are a subset of nature or the physical universe, though a subset with the peculiar property of self-reflection, consciousness, or purpose.  Humans conduct their purposeful activity, i.e. labor understood in the broad sense, as physical objects, engaging in physical interaction with the other objects in nature.  Human self-reflection, consciousness, or purpose is simply an emergent property of physical objects (human bodies) in interaction with one another and with the rest of nature.  An aspect of this interaction appears to humans as mental activity, as consciousness.  However, in a certain sense, these interactions are immediately and concretely physical, mechanical in the last analysis.  (Here, the term mechanics is interpreted in its broadest sense to refer to the ultimate basis of all physical, chemical, and biological processes.)  

[Here, wealth and net output.]

Second, the structures that result from the systematic interactions among individual humans, structures that acquire a certain objectivity or autonomy from the consciousness or will of the individual humans involved constitute what one usually calls ``society.''  Social objectivity is a different type of objectivity.  Physical or material objectivity is conceivable, in principle at least, even in the absence of human life.  Social objectivity is objectivity, i.e. independence from the consciousness or will of individual humans, only in the sense that the resultant of the actions and interactions among individuals are beyond the control of these individuals as such.  A social structure, i.e. a social object from the viewpoint of one human individual, can of course be altered or even dismantled by the actions of individuals, but the said actions need to conjoin, i.e. become collective actions of a critical magnitude, a magnitude sufficient to overcome the effect of the actions of other individuals taking opposite actions, for them to have that effect.

[Here, social labor time, and value in exchange.]

