Value

The theory of value is one of the thorniest issues in the Marxian approach.  Much effort has been devoted to interpreting and developing the approach.

Here's my attempt.

[Presupposes the distinction between material content and social form.]

Following Marx, Capital 3, I define value as the form that the determination of the "relative social importance" of different goods takes in a commodity producing society, such as a capitalist society.  This determination happens ex post factum.  In other words, value (and by this, think of a vector of allocations, prices and quantities) does not exist ex ante in anybody's consciousness, but is implied by the effective allocation that people in a commodity society bump into as a result of their individual actions (production, exchange, consumption) pursuing their private goals.

Individually, the acts of exchange and the prices involved appear arbitrary.  But if you take a step back using the historical materialist approach, then you see that ultimately a society as a whole "purchases"  (Smith) its entire output from nature via production, and thus society "pays" a "price" in labor time.  Given conditions in society, (re)producing the total (net) output (say in a year) requires a certain amount of society's labor time.  Thus, the individual production processes and labor processes appear as parts of this whole social process.

Consider the aspects of this process as a whole, not at the individual but at the social level.  Then we can abstract from exchange, since we're taking the whole social process.  By action (here, by production and consumption), people decide on the "relative social importance" of each of the goods.

Taken as a totality, people are just (re)producing themselves, their humanity, i.e. the productive power of their labor.  Society is a device that produces labor power by means of labor power.  There are two "moments" of this determination of the "relative social importance" of goods.  One, on the consumption side, which is guided by needs, i.e. aspirational powers (productive powers), people decide by choosing the amount to consume of each good the "relative social importance" of such good.  This is the "demand" side.  Two, on the production side, which depends on the existing productive forces, by producing each good in a certain amount, people decide on the "relative social importance" of such good.  Clearly, these two sides interact.  People may begin with a certain idea of the quantity and quality of what they wish to consume, but once they collide with the cost of acquiring such amount of the good to consume (ultimately, the amount of social labor required to reproduce such amount of the good), given alternatives, people may adjust their actions on the spot, and limit their consumption. Conversely, if the cost of fetching such amount of the good turns out to be smaller than anticipated, that may excite people to expand their demand for the good on the spot.  Similarly, producers may set out to produce an amount of a good only to find little interest by the consumers, which basically means that their effort was not socially necessary, too excessive for the magnitude of social necessity, and therefore partly wasted.  Marx's emphasis was correct.  Consumption is not uniquely human, unless it's been historically reshaped by production.  So, the determining aspect is the conditions of reproduction.  But in the background, there's the size of social need.


